22UPH201–PHYSICSFORINFORMATIONSCIENCE
UNIT I -FIBER OPTICS 
Principle, Numerical aperture and acceptance angle – Types of optical fiber (material,
refractive index and mode) –Attenuation mechanism in optical fibers –Applications: Fiber
optic communication –Fiber optic sensor: Pressure and Displacement.
UNITII-PHOTONICMATERIALS 
Classification of optical materials – Carrier generation and recombination processes –
Absorption emission and scattering of light in metals, insulators and semiconductors
(concepts only) – Photo current in a P-N diode – Solar cell – LED – Organic LED.
UNIT III - MAGNETIC MATERIALS 
Basic definitions – Origin of magnetic moment – Classification of magnetic materials (Dia,
Para & Ferro) – Domain theory of ferromagnetism – Hysteresis of ferromagnetic materials–
Soft and hard magnetic materials – Giant Magneto Resistance (GMR) effect.
UNITIV-QUANTUMDEVICESANDQUANTUMCOMPUTING 
Quantum confinement – Quantum structures: quantum wells, wires and dots – Tunnelling:
Resonant Tunnelling Diode (RTD) – Quantum system for information processing–Classical
bits – Quantum bits (or) qubits –CNOT gate – Advantage of quantum computing over
classical computing.
UNITV-DATASTORAGEDEVICES 
Computer Data storage, Types of Storage, Primary Storage–RAM, ROM, Cache–Secondary
Storage –Hard disk, Tertiary Storage – Magnetic tape, Compact disc, Digital versatile disc,
Blue-ray –Off-line Storage – USB Flash drive, memory card.

TOTAL: 30 PERIODS

UNIT I
FIBER OPTICS
PART-A 2 MARKS

1. Define wave guide.
A wave guide is a tubular structure through which some sort of energy could be
guided in the form of waves. Since light wave can be guided through a fiber, it is
called wave guide.
2. Point out the principle of optical fiber. (or) List the conditions for total
internal reflection?
Principle of optical fiber is Total internal Reflection.
(i) Light should travel from denser medium to rarer medium. That is the refractive
index of the core should be greater than the refractive e index of the cladding.
(ii) The angle of incidence should be greater than the critical angle.
3. Define NA and acceptance angle
NA is the light gathering capacity of an optical fiber. It can also be defined as the
sine of the acceptance angle.
The maximum angle at (or) below which the light can suffer total internal
reflection is called as acceptance angle. The cone of rays that are accepted by the
fiber to have total internal reflection inside the fiber is referred as acceptance
cone.
4. How optical fibers are classified based on no. of modes, material and refractive
index profile?
Optical fibers are classified into three major categories based on
(i) material–glass fiber, plastic fiber
(ii) number of modes–single mode fiber, multimode fiber
(iii) refractive index profile-step index fiber, graded index fiber
5. Differentiate single mode from multimode fiber

S. No. Single mode fiber Multimode fiber
1. Only one mode can be propagated Large modes are available for the

light to propagate
2. Has smaller core diameter Has larger core diameter

6. Distinguish between step index and graded index fiber
S. No. Step index fiber Graded index fiber
1. The difference in refractive index
between core and cladding is
obtained in a single step

Due to non-uniform refractive indices
their difference in refractive indices
between the core and cladding gradually
increases from centre towards interface.

2. The light ray propagates as meridinal
rays

The light propagates as skew rays

3. It follows a Zig Zag path It follows a helical path
4. Has a low bandwidth Has high bandwidth
5. Distortion is more Distortion is less
7. Define attenuation.
It is defined as the ratio of the optical power output from a length of a fiber ‘L’ to the
power input.
8. How fibers are used as sensor?
The fiber optic sensors are used to detect changes in frequency intensity,
temperature, current, polarization of light waves etc. A fiber optic sensor modulates
the light passing through it, it is exposed to change in environment.
9. Recall about active and passive sensor?

S.No. Active sensors Passive sensors
1. The physical parameters to be
sensed directly acts on the fiber
itself

Separate sensing elements will be
used and fiber will act as a guiding
media to the sensors

2. Example: Temperature/Pressure
sensors

Displacement sensor

10. List out any four major advantages of optical fibre communication.

● Light in weight
● Smaller in size
● Flexible
● Non-conductive, non radiative and non inductive.

11. Mention the application of optical fiber in various fields.

 Optical fibers are used for communication.
 It is also used as remote sensors in industries.

12. Construct a block diagram that portrait the optical fiber communication system.
(Apr/May 2024,Reg.2022)

UNIT II
PHOTONICMATERIALS
PART-A 2 MARKS

1. Define optical materials.
The materials which are sensitive to light are known as Optical materials. These
optical materials exhibit a variety of optical properties.
2. Illustrate the types of optical materials?
Generally, optical materials are classified into three types based on the nature of
propagation of light namely,
(i) Transparent
(ii) Translucent
(iii) Opaque
3. Define scattering of light.
It is a process by which the intensity of the wave attenuates as it travels through a
medium.

4. State carrier generation and recombination.
The carrier generation is the process whereby electrons and holes are created. The
recombination is the process whereby electrons and holes are annihilated.
5. Give the different types of carrier generations?
(i) Photo generation
(ii) Phonon generation
(iii) Impact ionization
6. List out the types of recombination process?
1. Radiative Recombination
2. Shockley-Read-Hall Recombination
3. Auger Recombination
7. Define photo diode.
It is a reverse biased P-N junction diode which responds to light absorption.
8. Give the basic principle of photo diode?
When light is incident on the depletion region of the reverse-biased pn junction, the
concentration of minority carriers increases. Therefore, reverse saturation current
increases.
9. What is the basic principle behold OLED?
The injection of electrons into the p – region from n-region makes a direct transition
from the conduction band to valence band. Then, the electron recombines with holes
and emits photons of energy Eg.
The forbidden gap energy is given by
E=hν
10. What is the principle of Solar Cell?
Solar cell works on the principle of Photovoltaic effect.

UNIT III
MAGNETIC MATERIALS

PART-A 2 MARKS

1. Define magnetic moment
Magnetic moment is defined as m=ia, where I is the electric current that flows through
a circular wire of an area of cross section ‘a’.

2. On the basis of spin how the materials are classified as para, ferro, antiferro
and ferri magnetic.
1. Paramagnetic materials have few unpaired electron spins of equal magnitudes.
2. Ferromagnetic materials have many unpaired electron spins with equal
magnitudes.
3. Antiferro magnetic materials have equal magnitude of spins but in antiparallel
manner.
4. Ferrimagnetic materials have spins in antiparallel manner but with unequal
magnitudes.
3. State Bohr Magneton?
The orbital magnetic moment and the spin magnetic moment of an electron in an
atom can be expressed in terms of atomic unit of magnetic moment called Bohr
magnetron.
4. Define magnetic induction.
It is defined as the number of magnetic lines of force passing normally through unit
area of cross section at that point. Unit wb/m2.
5. Write about Hysteresis loss.
When the specimen is taken through a cycle of magnetization, then there is a loss of
energy in the form of heat. This loss of energy is known as hysteresis loss.
6. What is meant by Hysteresis loop and what do you infer from it?
The word Hysteresis means lagging behind. When a ferromagnetic material is taken
through a cycle of magnetisation, the variation of magnetic induction B with respect
to applied field H is represented by a closed loop then this loop is called hysteresis
loop.

From the hysteresis loop we infer
1. The type magnetic materials either be a soft or hard
2. The value of residual magnet is m in the given specimen can be
determined
3. Its coercivity can be calculated.
7. Distinguish between soft and hard magnets.
S.No Hard magnets Soft magnets
1. They have hysteresis loop area
and hence large hysteresis loss.

They have small hysteresis loop and
hence small hysteresis loss.

2. The eddy current loss is more
due to its small resistivity

The eddy current loss is low due to its
higher resistivity

3. They have small values of
permeability and susceptibility

These materials have large values of
permeability and susceptibility

4. Domain wall movement is
difficult and it is irreversible in
nature

Domain walls move easily and
reversibly

5. The coercivity and retentivity are
large

The coercivity and retentivity are small

6. The irregularities like mechanical
strain will be more. Its
magnetostatic energy is large

Free from irregularities. Its
magnetostatic energy is very small.

7. These are produced by heating
the materials and plunging
suddenly into the cold liquid

These are produced by heating the
material to a sufficient temperature
followed by a slow cooling

8. Ex: Tungsten, steel, carbon Ex: Iron-silicon alloy, Nickel-iron alloy.

8. Recall about Coercivity and Retentivity of magnetic
materials.
Coercivity:
It is the strength of reverse magnetic field (-Hc) which is used to completely
demagnetize the material.
Retentivity:
There exists some residual intensity of magnetization in the specimen even when the
magnetic field is cut off. This is called residual magnetism or retentivity.

9. Write about ferromagnetism.
Certain materials like Iron (Fe), Cobalt (Co), Nickel (Ni) and certain alloys exhibit
spontaneous magnetization i.e., they have a small amount of magnetisation (atomic
moments are aligned) even in the absence of an external magnetic field.
This phenomenon is known as ferromagnetism.
10. Point out the properties of ferromagnetic materials?
1. All the dipoles are aligned parallel to each other due to the magnetic interaction
between any two dipoles.
2. They have permanent dipole moment. They attract the magnetic field strongly.
3. They exhibit magnetisation even in the absence of magnetic field. This property of
ferromagnetic materials is called as spontaneous magnetization.
11. Mention the energies involved in origin of domains in ferromagnetic material.
(i) Magnetostatic energy (ii) Crystalline energy
(iii)Domain wall energy (iv) Magnetostriction energy.
12. State the soft-magnetic materials?
Materials which are easy to magnetise and demagnetize are called soft
magnetic materials.
13. List out few soft magnetic materials and their applications
Soft magnetic materials:
(i) Pure or ingot iron
(ii) Cast iron(carbonabove2.5%)
(iii) Carbon steel
Applications:
a. Cast iron is used in the structure of electrical machinery and frame work of d.c.
machine.
b. Carbon steel has high mechanical strength used in making motor of turbo
alternators.
14. Mention few hard magnetic materials and their
application.
1. Tungsten steel contains 4.5 to 6% tungsten, 0.5 to 0.7% carbon and the remaining
is iron.
2. Cobalt steel contains 34% cobalt, 5% chromium 3.5 to 6% tungsten and
remaining is iron.

Applications:
3. Tungsten steel is used in making permanent magnets for dynamos, motor.
4. Cobalt steel is used in motor, fans and heavy duty instruments.
15. Show that the relative permeability (μr) of a magnetic material is greater than 1
Relative permeability (μr) is given by: μr=1+χm where χm is the magnetic susceptibility.
For magnetic materials (paramagnetic and ferromagnetic), χm>0, so: μr >1.
Thus, magnetic materials enhance the magnetic field, proving that μr is always greater
than 1.
16. Define Energy product in magnetism.
The energy product is defined as the product of retentivity (Br) and coercivity (Hc).
17. Reproduce Giant Magneto resistance effect. (R)
The Giant Magneto resistance (GMR) effect occurs in thin-film structures of
alternating ferromagnetic and non-magnetic conductive layers. It is observed when
the electrical resistance changes significantly under an applied magnetic field due to
spin-dependent electron scattering. GMR is widely used in hard disk drives and
magnetic sensors.

UNIT IV

QUANTUM DEVICES AND QUANTUM COMPUTING

PART-A 2 MARKS

1. Summarize about quantum confinement?
It is a process of reduction of the size of the solid such that the energy levels inside
become discrete
2. Illustrate about quantum structure?
When a bulk material is reduced in its size, atleast one of its dimension, in the order
of few nano metres, then the structure is known as quantum structure.
3. Define Quantum dots.
Quantum dots are tiny particles or nano crystals of a semiconducting
material with diameters in the range of 2-10 nanometers (10-50 atoms).
4. Recall about tunneling?
The phenomenon in which a particle, like an electron, encounters an energy
in an electronic structure and suddenly penetrates is known as tunneling.
5. Define Quantum Tunneling.
Quantum tunneling is defined as a quantum mechanical process where wave
functions can penetrate through a potential barrier. The transmission through the
potential barrier can be finite and relies exponentially on the barrier width and
barrier height.
6. Write about resonant tunneling?
The transmission probability of the double symmetric barrier is maximum and hence
the tunneling current reaches peak value when energy of electron wave is equal to
quantised energy state of the well. This phenomenon is known as resonance
tunneling.
7. What is quantum state?
In quantum physics, a quantum state is a mathematical entity that provides a
probability distribution for the outcomes of each possible measurement on a system.
Knowledge of the quantum state together with the rules for the system's evolution in
time exhausts all that can be predicted about the system's behavior.
8. Give the meaning of quantum bits.
The smallest unit of information in a quantum computer. Unlike bits in classical
systems, which are in one of two possible states labelled 1 and 0, a quantum bit
exists in a superposition of these two states, settling on one or the other only when a
measurement of the state is made. Also called qubit.

9. How the quantum gates are used?
A quantum gate or quantum logic gate is a rudimentary quantum circuit operating on
a small number of qubits. They are the analogues for quantum computers to classical
logic gates for conventional digital computers. Quantum logic gates are reversible,
unlike many classical logic gates
10. List out the applications of quantum computing.
They’re fast. Ultimately, quantum computers have the potential to provide
computational power on a scale that traditional computers cannot ever match. In
2019, for example, Google claimed to carry out a calculation in about 200seconds
that would take a classical supercomputer around 10,000 years.
11. How are qubits stored?
Qubits are stored in physical systems like superconducting circuits, trapped ions, or
photons, maintaining quantum properties. Their states are controlled and read using
microwave pulses, lasers, or magnetic fields.
12. Conclude the advantages of quantum computing over classical computing.(E)
In Quantum computing, 0’s and 1’s can be represented simultaneously.
Quantum computers are incredibly fast and effective.
Quantum computing is used to run complex simulations.

UNIT V
DATASTORAGEDEVICES
PART-A 2 MARKS

1. Write the different types of computer memory?
The different types of computer memory are primary memory and secondary memory.
2. Why are the programs and instructions essential for a computer to work
need to be stored in ROM? What would happen if they were stored in RAM?
The programs and instructions are stored in ROM because ROM retains its contents
even when the computer is turned off. If they were stored in RAM, all the data would
have been lost when the computer is turned off.
3. What are data storage units? Write the different types of storage units and
their relationships.
Data storage units are used to measure computer memory.
Relationship between different units of computer memory
are; 8 bits =1byte
1024 bytes = 1 Kilobyte
1024 KB =1 Megabyte
1024MB=1Gigabyte
1024GB = 1 Terabyte
1024 TB = 1 Petabyte
1024 PB = 1 Exabyte
1024 EB = 1 Zettabyte
4. Give the need of secondary storage devices? List some examples.
Secondary storage devices are used to store data permanently. Some examples are:
CD, Pen Drive, DVD, Hard disk.
5. Why is hard disk considered an important secondary storage device?
Hard disk is considered an important secondary storage device
because it stores the operating system, software applications and all the files and
folders.
6. What are the different types of CDs? How are they different from each other?
Different types of CDs are:
• CD-R (Compact Disc – Recordable) –Data can be written to this CD only once.
• CD-RW (Compact Disc–Rewritable)–Data can be rewritten to this CD after
erasing the stored data.

7. Compare the storage capacities of a hard disk and a blu-ray disc.
The storage capacity of a hard disk is 250 GB to 3 TB and Blu-ray disc is up to 25 GB.
8. List out the advantage does a USB flash drive have over other storage devices.
The advantages of a USB flash drive over the other devices are:
a) It is small in size and portable.
b) It is a durable device.
c) Writing and erasing speed is high.
D) It keeps the data safe and secure.
9. Define Blu-ray disc.
The Blu-Ray disc (BD) format was developed to enable recording, rewriting and
playback of high-definition video (HD), as well as storing large amounts of data.
10. How many types of Blu-ray are there?
Blu-ray Disc recordable (BD-R) refers to two optical disc formats that can be
recorded with an optical disc recorder. BD-Rs can be written to once, whereas
Blu-ray Disc Recordable Erasable (BD-REs) can be erased and re-recorded multiple
times.
11. What is USB flash drive?
A USB flash drive also known as a USB stick, USB thumb drive or pen drive is a
plug-and play portable storage device that uses flash memory and is light weight
enough to attach to a key chain.
12. How do you define a memory card?
A memory card is a type of storage device that is used for storing media and data
files. It provides a permanent and non-volatile medium to store data and files from
the attached device.
13. Interpret the importance of Blue-ray disc.
A Blu-ray Disc is an optical disc storage medium that enables high-definition video,
high-capacity data storage (up to 50GB on dual-layer discs), and enhanced audio
quality, surpassing DVDs. Its importance lies in superior data density, faster data
transfer rates, and support for advanced multimedia applications.